Create blockchain-space-tokenization.mdx (#1016)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: docs/concepts/blockchain-space-tokenization.mdx

> ---
> title: Blockchain space tokenization (BST)
> description: Learn how blockchain space tokenization (BST) resolves the trade-off between low transaction fees and fast processing times.
> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
copyright: This file is part of midnight-docs. Copyright (C) Midnight Foundation. Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); You may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
title: Blockchain space tokenization (BST)
description: Learn how blockchain space tokenization (BST) resolves the trade-off between low transaction fees and fast processing times.
---
```

> Blockchains have a physical reality: limited room in each block for transactions. When too many people want to use the network at once, demand spikes and congestion becomes a major issue. Historically, users had to make a choice, either pay expensive fees, or accept long, uncertain wait times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

# Blockchain space tokenization (BST)

Blockchains have a physical reality: limited room in each block for transactions. When too many people want to use the network at once, demand spikes and congestion becomes a major issue. Historically, users had to choose between paying expensive fees and accepting long, uncertain wait times.
```

> Peer-reviewed research by Input Output Research (IOR) proposes a fundamental shift in managing this scarce resource: **block space**. By introducing a new concept called blockchain space tokenization (BST), the network can tokenize transaction capacity, allowing users to pay in advance to secure the ability to post transactions regularly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Peer-reviewed research by Input Output Research (IOR) proposes a fundamental shift in managing this scarce resource: **block space**. Blockchain space tokenization (BST) lets the network tokenize transaction capacity, allowing users to pay in advance for the ability to post transactions regularly.
```

> ### The congestion dilemma

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The congestion dilemma
```

> Currently, there are two ways blockchains can handle congestion, but both have distinct structural flaws:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blockchains handle congestion in two ways, but both have structural flaws:
```

> * **Auction and similar models (Bitcoin and Ethereum):** Users bid against each other and pay for faster transaction processing. **Fees are unpredictable**; a user might pay $1 one minute and $10 just a few minutes later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Auction and similar models (Bitcoin and Ethereum):** Users bid against each other for faster transaction processing. **Fees are unpredictable**; you might pay $1 one minute and $10 just a few minutes later.
```

> * **Fixed-fee model (Cardano's current state):** Each transaction costs a predictable, flat rate. However, **delays become unpredictable**. If an attacker floods the network with thousands of transactions, legitimate transactions get stuck at the back of a massive line in a first-in, first-out (FIFO) approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Fixed-fee model (Cardano's current state):** Each transaction costs a predictable, flat rate. However, **delays become unpredictable**. If an attacker floods the network, legitimate transactions queue behind them in a first-in, first-out (FIFO) approach.
```

This BST research solves a seemingly paradoxical problem. Before this paper, the industry consensus was that you had to choose between low fees or fast processing, and couldn't have both. BST breaks that trade-off.

> ### The solution: a subscription for block space

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The solution: a subscription for block space
```

> The research proposes moving from a pay-as-you-go model to a **subscription/reservation model** where the blockchain **tokenizes part of its future capacity** rather than paying when a transaction is sent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The research proposes moving from a pay-as-you-go model to a **subscription/reservation model**. Instead of paying per transaction at send time, the blockchain **tokenizes part of its future capacity**.
```

> Essentially, the right to put a transaction into a block is turned into a distinct digital token. Users or applications can buy these tokens in advance, granting them the right to post a certain number of transactions regularly over a period of time and ensuring that they have a **guaranteed slot**. Users who hold blockchain space tokens are mathematically guaranteed to have their transactions included within a very short, predictable window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BST turns the right to include a transaction in a block into a distinct digital token. Users or applications buy these tokens in advance, granting them the right to post transactions regularly over a set period with a **guaranteed slot**. Token holders are mathematically guaranteed to have their transactions included within a short, predictable window.
```

> ### Advantages of block space tokenization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Advantages of block space tokenization
```

> There are many advantages to this novel approach of using blockchain space tokens, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Block space tokenization offers several advantages:
```

> * **Enterprises:** Can budget exactly how much their blockchain usage will cost for the entire year and know that their supply chain data will never be delayed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Enterprises:** Can budget exactly how much blockchain usage costs for an entire year and know that supply chain data arrives on time.
```

> * **DeFi:** Oracles (which provide price data) need to update every few seconds. BST ensures their updates always land on time, preventing market crashes caused by stale data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **DeFi:** Oracles (which provide price data) need to update every few seconds. BST ensures their updates always land on time, preventing market instability caused by stale data.
```

> * **Predictability:** Users know that transactions are processed in a predictable manner by implementing asymptotically optimal delays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Predictability:** BST implements asymptotically optimal delays, giving users predictable transaction processing times.
```

> * **Layer 2 protocols:** Networks like Lightning set strict time bounds for participants to respond to and challenge network states. BST provides the predictable transaction delays necessary to prevent the severe security repercussions that occur when users miss these critical windows. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Layer 2 protocols:** Networks like Lightning set strict time bounds for participants to respond to and challenge network states. BST provides the predictable transaction delays necessary to prevent severe security issues when participants miss these critical windows.
```

> ### The trade off: challenges of block space tokenization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The trade-off: challenges of block space tokenization
```

> While the BST system mathematically guarantees a maximum delay for transactions, the "worst-case scenario" could still test a user's patience. Because priority is based partly on how much token value you hold, a user with a very small token balance might still face a significantly long maximum wait time during periods of extreme, adversarial network congestion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the BST system mathematically guarantees a maximum delay for transactions, the worst-case wait could still be significant. Because priority depends partly on token value held, a small token balance might still mean a longer maximum wait time during extreme network congestion.
```

> ### From the blackboard to reality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## From the blackboard to reality
```

> BST turns blockchain capacity into a stable, predictable, tokenized commodity that reduces delays and eliminates congestion. The practical impact of these concepts is already being explored; for instance, the Midnight blockchain incorporates several core ideas from this BST research. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BST turns blockchain capacity into a stable, predictable, tokenized commodity that reduces delays and eliminates congestion. Midnight already incorporates several core ideas from this BST research.
```

> By leveraging these tokenization principles, Midnight is better equipped to manage its network resources and support its goal of offering rational privacy – ensuring that confidential business logic remains fluid, responsive, and affordable without compromising on cost predictability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tokenization principles help Midnight manage its network resources and support its goal of offering rational privacy. Confidential business logic remains fluid, responsive, and affordable without compromising cost predictability.
```

> ### Learn more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Learn more
```

> More details on this concept of tokenizing blockchain space can be found in the [Blockchain Space Tokenization](https://www.iog.io/papers/blockchain-space-tokenization) research paper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read the [Blockchain Space Tokenization](https://www.iog.io/papers/blockchain-space-tokenization) research paper for more details on tokenizing blockchain space.
```
